Add first draft for blog post on fork/upstream relationship (#886)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2024-12-01-forks-upstream-relationship/index.md

---
slug: "forks-upstream-relationship"
title: The dynamic relationship of forks with their upstream repository

> date: '2024-12-08'

Author: Determine authoring policy: everyone in the comm call or only whoever gives feedback on this draft?

---

## Context setting

rOpenSci organizes [monthly co-working hours](https://ropensci.org/coworking/) on a variety of topics.
But the constant is the quality of the discussion that ensues and the renewed energy that comes from it.

The November coworking session welcomed Stefanie Butland from [openscapes](https://www.openscapes.org/) as a co-host.
She shared openscape's approach of ["Forking as a worldview"](https://rladiesrome.org/talks/2024/meetup/11182024/index.html)

> and invited participants to share their experience using forks to build on existing projects.

Author: Stef, do you want to add more here?

This blog post summarizes some of the insights that emerged during the subsequent discussion.

## The different types of forks

We identified two different types of forks, which take place in different contexts,
and will have different relationships with their upstream repository in the long-run:

1. Forks can be used as a starting point for a new diverging project, rather than starting from scratch.
In this situation, the fork author does not intent to sync with the upstream repository after the initial fork.
This type of fork may therefore miss out on new features developed in upstream.
This type of fork will often happen when you copy template for a personal website (example shared by Will Gearty), 
or when you re-use an existing project of yours as a boilerplate to build your new project.

2. Forks can also be used to custom or tweak the original project, 
in a way that upstream cannot or doesn't want to address.
In this type of forks, we usually try to not diverge too much from upstream to benefit from new features,
and we regularly sync with them.
A major downside is that syncing will often come with gnarly git conflicts.

> An example of this is various organizations forking the Carpentries workbench to customize the look and feel or their internal Carpentries-style training materials.

Reviewer: First sentence of 2. should have similar structure to 1. where the main contrast is we don't want to diverge, and then say upstream source does not want to incorporate our adaptations.

> An example of this is various organizations forking the Carpentries workbench to customize the look and feel or their internal Carpentries-style training materials.

Reviewer: I also think it would be fantastic to link to your own forked version of this so folks can see what it looks like in action. ... haha I see that below.

This is also what typically happens when open-source projects are packaged in Operating System distributions, such as Debian.
The Debian package maintainers often tweak some settings or make minor code modifications to improve integration with the rest of the system.

## Facilitating the cross-pollination between forks and upstream

In this section, we focus on the second type of forks, 
where the fork author wants to stay in sync with the upstream repository.
We mentioned that conflicts were a major downside of this approach.

What are the strategies to minimize the conflicts? 
And why is it in the interest of everyone (the fork owners, but also upstream maintainers) to minimize them?

> ### Simplifying syncs and reducing git conflicts {#simplifying-syncs}

Author: I think this section could benefit from code examples or illustrations. There are links to PRs but something in the post itself may also help.

In practice, this can for example be done by using configuration files and variables.
This serves the double purpose of being more DRY and of separating changes.
In the example of the Carpentries workbench, [a pull request added a Sass variable to change the font](https://github.com/carpentries/varnish/pull/151), 
removing the need to change it in multiple locations.

But from the fork owner perspective, some techniques can also make conflict resolution smoother. 
A major location of conflicts are auto-generated changes or files.
In the workbench example, this is the concatenated and minified CSS files.
They tend to concentrate conflicts because they regroup changes from multiple files, 
and they are minified on a single line, which means git cannot distinguish what was changed.

But you can automate the conflict resolution for these cases.
The key is to make automated changes in a separate commit.
When this commit conflicts, you can re-run the script that generates the file,
and commit the result, without having to think about what should be kept or not.

Alternatively, upstream can sometimes stop tracking auto-generated files from git,

> and instead render them on the fly at build time.

Author: Yes, but I'm not completely sure when I will get around to doing it so I don't think it should be a blocker for this post.

---
slug: "forks-upstream-relationship"
title: The dynamic relationship of forks with their upstream repository
date: '2024-12-08'
tags:
- community
- meetings
- open science
- maintenance
- open-source
- carpentries
- coworking
---

## Context setting

rOpenSci organizes [monthly co-working hours](/coworking/) on a variety of topics.
But the constant is the quality of the discussion that ensues and the renewed energy that comes from it.

The November coworking session welcomed Stefanie Butland from [openscapes](https://www.openscapes.org/) as a co-host.
She shared openscape's approach of ["Forking as a worldview"](https://rladiesrome.org/talks/2024/meetup/11182024/index.html)

> and invited participants to share their experience using forks to build on existing projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stefanie invited participants to share their experiences in forking to adapt or build on existing projects, and we came back to some practical challenges of forking.
```

This blog post summarizes some of the insights that emerged during the subsequent discussion.

## The different types of forks

We identified two different types of forks, which take place in different contexts,
and will have different relationships with their upstream repository in the long-run:

1. Forks can be used as a starting point for a new diverging project, rather than starting from scratch.

> In this situation, the fork author does not intent to sync with the upstream repository after the initial fork.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this situation, the fork author does not intend to sync with the upstream repository after the initial fork.
```

This type of fork may therefore miss out on new features developed in upstream.

> This type of fork will often happen when you copy template for a personal website (example shared by Will Gearty), 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This type of fork will often happen when you copy a template for a personal website (example shared by Will Gearty), 
```

or when you re-use an existing project of yours as a boilerplate to build your new project.

> 2. Forks can also be used to custom or tweak the original project, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Forks can also be used to customize or tweak the original project, 
```

> This type of fork will often happen when you copy a template for a personal website (an example shared by Will Gearty in our discussions), 

Author: TODO: add link to Will's online presence if he doesn't end up as an author

Reviewer 2: https://williamgearty.com/

in a way that upstream cannot or doesn't want to address.
In this type of forks, we usually try to not diverge too much from upstream to benefit from new features,
and we regularly sync with them.
A major downside is that syncing will often come with gnarly git conflicts.

> An example of this is various organizations forking the Carpentries workbench to customize the look and feel or their internal Carpentries-style training materials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example of this is various organizations forking the Carpentries workbench to customize the look and feel of their internal Carpentries-style training materials.
```

Reviewer: would be great to give a sense of how many orgs have done this. I thought it was pretty impressive. Shows the value of the open sharing of the original project

> This is also what typically happens when open-source projects are packaged in Operating System distributions, such as Debian.

Reviewer: Is this important to say? My non-software-dev mind doesn't get it. Does it fit the big picture we're trying to convey?

Author: I'm on the fence. 

I think it's a really good example because that's probably one of the most common cases when you have this kind of long-lived forks that are just here to patch some existing projects and make them fit into the specific operating system policies.
If anyone was curious about the kind of (social & technical) issues that can arise from these scenarios, they would definitely get a lot of value looking at this example.

At the same time, you are right it may only speak to a minority of users at this time.

The ideal outcome in my opinion would be to find a way to keep it but rephrase it so that it's clearer even for people unfamiliar with this ecosystem. Any suggestions?

Reviewer: This extra context is really helpful! Def keep. 
> This is also what typically happens when open-source projects are packaged in Operating System distributions, such as Debian.

People who work in Linux operating systems will recognize .... (something something that maybe @steffilazerte could write - your comment above sounds super relatable)

Reviewer 3: Add a link to something that people who want to know more about can follow.

The Debian package maintainers often tweak some settings or make minor code modifications to improve integration with the rest of the system.

## Facilitating the cross-pollination between forks and upstream

In this section, we focus on the second type of forks, 
where the fork author wants to stay in sync with the upstream repository.
We mentioned that conflicts were a major downside of this approach.

What are the strategies to minimize the conflicts? 
And why is it in the interest of everyone (the fork owners, but also upstream maintainers) to minimize them?

### Simplifying syncs and reducing git conflicts {#simplifying-syncs}

> Going back to the example of organizations forking the Carpentries workbench,

Reviewer: I'd love a sentence on why you did this! Comes back to the big picture of value of forking and value of Carpentries making the workbench open. A sentence on epiverse and what the unique training is? imo helps people picture when they might want to use the advice in this post

Hugo has [forked for the workbench to customize Epiverse-TRACE lessons with their own branding](https://github.com/epiverse-trace/varnish/pull/7).
But the upstream repository regularly receives updates with bug fixes or new features.

The few first months were painful because of the conflicts that arose when syncing with upstream.
But a couple of changes in upstream have greatly reduced the probability of conflicts.

In a nutshell, upstream can make it easier for forks to stay in sync by reducing the number of files that a fork needs to modify,
and by isolating these changes in specific locations.

In practice, this can for example be done by using configuration files and variables.

> This serves the double purpose of being more DRY and of separating changes.

Reviewer: what is DRY?

In the example of the Carpentries workbench, [a pull request added a Sass variable to change the font](https://github.com/carpentries/varnish/pull/151), 
removing the need to change it in multiple locations.

> But from the fork owner perspective, some techniques can also make conflict resolution smoother. 

Reviewer 4: What kind of technique? Was adding a Sass variable not a technique?

```suggestion
From the fork owner perspective, some other techniques can also make conflict resolution smoother.
```

A major location of conflicts are auto-generated changes or files.
In the workbench example, this is the concatenated and minified CSS files.
They tend to concentrate conflicts because they regroup changes from multiple files, 
and they are minified on a single line, which means git cannot distinguish what was changed.

But you can automate the conflict resolution for these cases.

> The key is to make automated changes in a separate commit.

Reviewer: can you link to an example commit? So ppl can see and copy approach, rather than having to imagine how to do it

When this commit conflicts, you can re-run the script that generates the file,
and commit the result, without having to think about what should be kept or not.

Alternatively, upstream can sometimes stop tracking auto-generated files from git,
and instead render them on the fly at build time.

### Contributing back to upstream

> The previous sections highlighted how much work maintaining a fork.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous sections highlighted how much work goes into maintaining a fork.
```

Reviewer: This section could use some clarification  or condensing. I wasn't sure of the take-home message in a quick read

Reviewer 4: Agreed, I could see some interesting nuggets of information, but wasn't clear on the main idea.

> Is it possible to integrate the features to upstream and avoid having to maintain a fork?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
So, is it perhaps possible to integrate the features to upstream and avoid having to maintain a fork?
```

> Forks can be a good way to pilot new features or approaches.

Reviewer 4: Which can be then integrated back into the upstream?

Note that this is not always possible as upstream may have a restricted scope, or limited resources for maintenance.

Forks are sometimes intended from the start as short-lived.

> They only exist until the PR is merged when the user cannot wait for the PR to be merged, especially if upstream is slow to review PRs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They only exist until the PR to upstream is merged when the user cannot wait for the PR to be merged, especially if upstream is slow to review PRs.
```

Reviewer: needs some clarification

> In this case, the fork is already contributing back to upstream.

Reviewer 4: How, if it's not merged?

But in other cases, can forks that started as a way to customize a project and start accumulating new features contribute back to upstream?
Forks can indeed be a great way to pilot new features, and to show the value of these features to upstream.

When contributing back, each pull request should focus on a single feature or bug fix, rather than pushing all changes the fork has accumulated.
It can also build confidence to show that you've been using this feature for a while without issues.

### It takes two to tango

> Getting forks to contribute back is only possible is they can stay in touch with upstream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Getting forks to contribute back is only possible if they can stay in touch with upstream.
```

Reviewer: maybe add a comment on value of communicating your intent up front with the upsteam source? "I'd like to contribute back to upstream. Does the project have the capacity for this (merging PRs in a timely way). How could that work for you?"

Indeed, forks that have diverged too much from upstream will have a hard time contributing back, and making nice palatable pull requests.

> In other words, upstream repositories should follow the steps outlined in the ["Simplifying syncs and reducing git conflicts"](#simplifying-syncs) section to ensure forks can more easily stay in sync.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps soften this, as it sounds like the onus is just on the Upstream maintainers, but that's not necessarily always the case. Sometimes they need to make big changes and sometimes it's more important to improve the project than to worry about too much divergence with the forks (or waiting for forks to submit their PRs before moving on). 

I like Stef's suggestion of communication. 

What do you think of something along these lines:
```suggestion
In other words, communication, and where possible, following the steps outlined in the ["Simplifying syncs and reducing git conflicts"](#simplifying-syncs) section are key to ensuring forks can more easily stay in sync.
```

This highlights the symbiotic relationship that can exist between forks and upstream repositories, when both parties are willing to make the effort.

## Conclusion

While sometimes presented as a fracture, forks are an integral part of the open-source ecosystem.
They offer a way to build on existing projects, to add extra features without increasing the maintenance burden of the upstream repository, to pilot new features.

> They can be hard to maintain, but it is also possible for the fork and upstream maintainers to work together to make the process smoother.

Reviewer: Maybe at bottom have a call to action asking people to consider what projects they are planning that could be forked. Code, lessons, documentation. Do they envision diverging or contributing back? With this info in the post how might they approach it.

Reviewer 3: This is also related to sustainable environments; perhaps the core developers team doesn't want that new feature you need, but the fork allows you to have it anyway. I like the call for action.

- coworking
---

## Context setting

rOpenSci organizes [monthly co-working hours](/coworking/) on a variety of topics.
But the constant is the quality of the discussion that ensues and the renewed energy that comes from it.

The November coworking session welcomed Stefanie Butland from [openscapes](https://www.openscapes.org/) as a co-host.
She shared Openscapes' approach of ["Forking as a worldview"](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1aL0TVFM7xxzTCJoE3tEArDE32wh59wkmBCy6Vcmwvy4/).
Forks in the open-source software world refer to copies of an existing open-source project that add their own changes on top of the original codebase.
Openscapes is extending this classic software development interpretation to an even more open philosophy of encouraging people to take anything that works to new places.
Things like the value of sharing, reusing, and remixing of *how we work*, in addition to the work itself.
Stefanie invited participants to share their experiences in forking to adapt or build on existing projects, and we came back to some practical challenges of forking.

This blog post summarizes and develops some of the insights that emerged during the subsequent discussion.

> 

Reviewer 3: I think it still needs to be clarified that the focus on the insight is in GitHub repos and code repositories.  Because of the previous explanation, I was expecting another kind of content that was not so code-related. It feels like a big jump from here to talk about upstream and repositories.

## The different types of forks

We identified two different types of forks, which take place in different contexts,
and will have different relationships with their upstream repository in the long-run:

1. Forks can be used as a starting point for a new diverging project, rather than starting from scratch.
In this situation, the fork author does not intend to sync with the upstream repository after the initial fork.
This type of fork may therefore miss out on new features developed in upstream.
This type of fork will often happen when you copy a template for a personal website (an example shared by Will Gearty in our discussions), 
or when you re-use an existing project of yours as a boilerplate to build your new project.

2. Forks can also be used to customize or tweak the original project, 

> in a way that upstream cannot or doesn't want to address.

Reviewer 2: It might be good to explain here that it isn't usually the case that upstream doesn't _want_ the customization, just that they don't have the capacity to implement them but are very much open to PRs (although it is sometimes the case that upstream has philosophical objections to particular customizations that they would not want a PR for).

and instead render them on the fly at build time.

In the context of R packages, common auto-generated files are `.Rd` documentation files,
which are often auto-generated from roxygen2 comments in `.R` files.
Isolating these changes [in a separate commit](https://github.com/ropensci/lightr/commit/4dcb21e72f6df71e2cc46d12244cde8dcc3e2635) can also facilitate conflict resolution.

### Integrating the fork changes back into upstream

The previous section highlighted how much work goes into maintaining a fork.
And while we shared techniques to alleviate some of this work, regular syncing is still required, and conflicts are still going to come up from time to time.
So, is it perhaps possible to integrate the features to upstream and avoid having to maintain a fork altogether?

Forks are sometimes intended from the start as short-lived.
They only exist until the PR to upstream is merged when the user cannot wait for the PR to be merged, especially if upstream is slow to review PRs.

But in other cases, forks start as a way to customize a project and accumulate new features, without necessarily the intention to contribute them back initially.

> But it's possible for the fork maintainer to change them mind at any time and decide to contribute back.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But it's possible for the fork maintainer to change their mind at any time and decide to contribute back.
```

---
slug: "forks-upstream-relationship"
title: The dynamic relationship of forks with their upstream repository
date: '2024-12-08'
author: 
- Hugo Gruson
- Stefanie Butland
- Ruby Krasnow 
editor: Steffi LaZerte
tags:
- community
- meetings
- open science
- maintenance
- open-source
- carpentries
- coworking
---

## Context setting

rOpenSci organizes [monthly co-working hours](/coworking/) on a variety of topics.
But the constant is the quality of the discussion that ensues and the renewed energy that comes from it.

The November coworking session welcomed Stefanie Butland from [openscapes](https://www.openscapes.org/) as a co-host.

> She shared Openscapes' approach of ["Forking as a worldview"](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1aL0TVFM7xxzTCJoE3tEArDE32wh59wkmBCy6Vcmwvy4/).

Author: @stefaniebutland, it seems that this document is not readable by everyone.

Reviewer: updated so anyone with link can view

---
slug: "forks-upstream-relationship"
title: The dynamic relationship of forks with their upstream repository
date: '2024-12-08'
author: 
- Hugo Gruson
- Stefanie Butland
- Ruby Krasnow 
editor: Steffi LaZerte
tags:
- community
- meetings
- open science
- maintenance
- open-source
- carpentries
- coworking
---

## Context setting

rOpenSci organizes [monthly co-working hours](/coworking/) on a variety of topics.
But the constant is the quality of the discussion that ensues and the renewed energy that comes from it.

> The November coworking session welcomed Stefanie Butland from [openscapes](https://www.openscapes.org/) as a co-host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The November coworking session welcomed Stefanie Butland from [Openscapes](https://www.openscapes.org/) as a co-host.
```
